[WIP]Graphql update (#23414)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/guides/developer/getting-started/graphql-rpc.mdx

:::

The quickest way to access the GraphQL service for Sui RPC is through the online IDE that provides a complete toolbox for fetching data and executing transactions on the network. The online IDE provides features such as auto-completion (use <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Space</kbd> or just start typing), built-in documentation (Book icon, top-left), multi-tabs, and more.

The online IDE is available for Mainnet and Testnet. You can try the various queries on this page directly in the IDE.

- Mainnet: https://graphql.mainnet.sui.io/graphql

> - Testnet: https://graphql.testnet.sui.io/graphql

Reviewer: Can we add a info or warn admonition here that developers should stop using the GraphQL alpha endpoints from earlier - https://sui-mainnet.mystenlabs.com/graphql and https://sui-testnet.mystenlabs.com/graphql, and that they should migrate their apps to use the new beta schema as soon as possible?

  - `dryRunTransactionBlock` is being replaced with `simulateTransaction`
  - `bcs` fields are qualified with the type of BCS data they hold, to avoid confusion.
  - `changedObject` and `inputObject` filters in `transactions` query are being replaced with `affectedObject`.
  - `address.coins` and `address.stakedSuis` are being deprecated in favor of `address.objects` with the corresponding `type` filter.
  - `MoveValue.data` has been deprecated since it does not add value over `MoveValue.json`, which provides a more clear representation of the data.

### Consistency

GraphQL Beta offers the ability to run a query at a fixed checkpoint (retention permitting). This allows clients to query the chain state at a particular snapshot in time over multiple arbitrary requests (GraphQL Alpha offered consistency across multiple requests as long as they were for pages of a paginated query).

### Versioning

APIs for traversing different versions of packages and objects have been added. You can now list a package or object's versions, or go from one version of a package or object to another version by number, or the latest version.

### Splitting up query APIs

> Paginated query APIs were previously responsible for three kinds of query pattern, which will be broken up into three separate APIs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Paginated query APIs were previously responsible for three kinds of query pattern, which will be broken up into two separate APIs:
```

    - The old behaviour is reproducible by explicitly setting the checkpoint to query from (see “Consistency” above).

### Preserving Entity IDs

The service will retain the ability to identify entities that have been pruned when they are referred to be other entities. For example, even if an object’s previous transaction has been pruned, the service will still be able to return the transaction’s digest.

### Unpruned point lookups

That being said, point look-ups will generally be unpruned, if GraphQL has access to an Archival Service.

### More detailed retention API

The service will provide more details about the retention of its underlying data through the `ServiceConfig.retention` field in the near future.

### Governance

APIs related to governance and staking will be removed in favor of using view functions to access the data at its source of truth on-chain.

> ### Relay Node and ID APIs

Reviewer 2: Let's skip this for now -- we don't have it yet (Soon).

  }
}
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ### Find a transaction block by its digest

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Find a transaction by its digest
```

And generally in places where we say "transaction block" we should be saying "transaction".

  bcs
}
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Fetch all dynamic fields on an object

Paginate over the dynamic fields of an object. This works even when the object in question is [wrapped](../../../concepts/object-ownership/wrapped.mdx) by using the <a href="/references/sui-api/sui-graphql/reference/queries/owner" data-noBrokenLinkCheck='true'>owner</a> query. Can be used for iterating over the elements of on-chain data structures, like tables and bags. See [The Move Book](https://move-book.com/programmability/dynamic-collections.html) to learn more about dynamic collections available in Move.

:::info

This example uses [fragments](../../../concepts/graphql-rpc.mdx#fragments) and [variables](../../../concepts/graphql-rpc.mdx#variables).

:::

<Tabs groupId="graphql">

> <TabItem label="Beta" value="beta">

Reviewer 2: `owner` -> `address` below (for beta)

      }
      epoch {
        epochId
        referenceGasPrice
      }
    }
  }
}
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Example 3: Get coin objects owned by an address

Return all `Coin<0x2::sui::SUI>` objects that an address owns.

<Tabs groupId="migrating-json-rpc">

<TabItem value="json-rpc3" label="JSON-RPC">

```json
query {
  "jsonrpc": "2.0",
  "id": 1,
  "method": "suix_getCoins",
  "params": [
    "0x5094652429957619e6efa79a404a6714d1126e63f551f4b6c7fb76440f8118c9", //owner
    "0x2::sui::SUI",                                                      //coin type
    "0xe5c651321915b06c81838c2e370109b554a448a78d3a56220f798398dde66eab", //cursor
    3 //limit
  ]
}
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="graphql3" label="GraphQL">

```graphql
query {
  address(address: "0x5094652429957619e6efa79a404a6714d1126e63f551f4b6c7fb76440f8118c9") {
    coins(
      first: 3,
      after: "IAB3ha2PEA4ESRF4UErsJufJEwYpmSbCq7UNpxIHnLhG",
      type: "0x2::sui::SUI"
    ) {
      nodes {
        address
      }
    }
  }
}
```

:::info

The cursor is now passed in the `after` (or `before`) fields on the connection, and the limit in the `first` or `last` fields.

:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> ## New features

Reviewer 2: Couple more new features we can highlight:

- Time travel queries with `checkpoint { query { ... } }`
- Nested dynamic field look-ups (and paginating dynamic fields with their contents in one request).
- Fetching live objects by owner kind and type (e.g. all shared objects of a certain type).
- Fetching deserialized input and output object contents from a transaction that has just executed.

- Nested dynamic field look-ups (and paginating dynamic fields with their contents in one request).
- Fetching live objects by owner kind and type (such as all shared objects of a certain type).
- Fetching deserialized input and output object contents from a transaction that has just executed.

The following examples demonstrate some of the functions not available with JSON-RPC.

### Example 4: Getting objects by type

Fetch the latest versions of objects of type `0x2::package::Publisher` that are currently live on-chain.

```graphql
query {
  objects(filter: { type: "0x2::package::Publisher" }) {
    nodes {
      address
      digest
      asMoveObject {
        contents { json }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### Example 5: Paging through package versions

Find all versions of the Sui framework and list their modules:

```graphql
query {
  packageVersions(address: "0x2") {
    nodes {
      version
      modules {
        nodes {
          name
        }
      }
    }
  } 
}
```

## Related links

<RelatedLink to="/concepts/graphql-rpc.mdx" />
<RelatedLink to="/references/sui-graphql.mdx" />
<RelatedLink to="/concepts/graphql-indexer" />

> <RelatedLink href="https://sui-testnet.mystenlabs.com/graphql" label="Sui Testnet GraphiQL" desc="Sui GraphiQL IDE for the Testnet network." />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<RelatedLink href="https://graphql.testnet.sui.io/graphql" label="Sui Testnet GraphiQL" desc="Sui GraphiQL IDE for the Testnet network." />
```

> <RelatedLink href="https://sui-mainnet.mystenlabs.com/graphql" label="Sui Mainnet GraphiQL" desc="Sui GraphiQL IDE for the Mainnet network." />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<RelatedLink href="https://graphql.mainnet.sui.io/graphql" label="Sui Mainnet GraphiQL" desc="Sui GraphiQL IDE for the Mainnet network." />
```
